My project will address disparities in mental health care access across the United States. I would like to particularly focus on trauma and PTSD related care. I hope to explore why these disparities exist and what they are correlated to. I would also like to evaluate what kind of a difference could be made if care were more accessible to those who needed it. How much of an effect does untreated PTSD have on an individual and societal level?

I plan on creating visualization of where trauma and PTSD care is available, where it is needed and helpful visualization of if there are any disparities, correlations with other indicators. I’ll also work on an analysis of what the effects expansion of access could have by creating a model of the impacts of treatment. I believe I’ll have everything done in a Jupyter notebook. I hope to create an interactive map of professionals who are trained to provide trauma therapy though this would have limited use unless I can have it be updated regularly.

For my project, data will be my most important tool. Most of my data will come from this list https://www.apa.org/science/about/psa/2018/06/publicly-available-data. To access certain datasets from this list, I will need to create various accounts. I’m in contact with professionals in the field in case I need additional data that I cannot pinpoint on my own. I will also need to scrape for professionals trained in trauma therapy and reference their locations with google maps API to create a map. To accomplish this project, I will need to manage databases and various datasets. I’ll also be creating visualization though they may be accomplished using only plotly express. I imagine the scraping will involve a combination of selenium and beautiful soup and regular expressions. I’ll need to learn how to interact with google map’s API. I’ll need to create a complex model and apply what I know from numerical methods.

I’m going to learn how to create an honest project and not come at the data with a biased perspective. I’ll learn how to deal with real world data and how to find good data for my purposes. I’ll learn how to create a complex model and how that can actually be done in practice. I’ll hopefully also learn how to make strong and compelling visualization. Hopefully, I’ll also learn that there is no shortage in care though not likely.

The bigger hurdles I see in this project is the time requirement and that fact that I am doing it on my own. This might too large an undertaking and I may not be able to deliver everything I would like to. I’m aware that there will also be challenges in finding up to date information on providers on the web. It is likely that identifying PTSD is difficult especially if there is not mental health care available at all so there may not be accurate information on this.

I hope that this project would at least lead to an increase of awareness of the issues of trauma and PTSD. I do not think my project will do justice for the problem as even with access to care, treatment is very difficult, and the dropout rate is quite high so access is not the only issue. Perhaps the cost of treatment is greater than the benefits to the individual and as such insurance companies will not see it as being worth covering. I think a project such as this could be used as evidence to expand care. Perhaps, it could even show a demand for treatment and incentivize development of pharmaceutical options to treat PTSD as currently there is a dearth of options.

In two weeks, I hope to have much of the data acquisition complete and ready to be accessed through a database. By week four, I would like to have completed some of the visualizations and some of analysis. By week six, I would like to have all the visualizations and analysis complete and the begins of a model.